Cholesterol
Cholesterol is a waxy substance your body uses to build cells and to make hormones. Your body needs some cholesterol, but having too much in your blood increases the risk of heart disease and stroke.

Cholesterol comes from two sources. Your liver makes all the cholesterol you need. The rest of the cholesterol in your body comes from foods from animals. For example, meat, poultry and dairy products all contain dietary cholesterol.

Those same foods can also be high in saturated and trans fats. These fats can increase the cholesterol in your blood. For some people, this added cholesterol may increase their risk of heart disease and stroke.

Some tropical oils, such as palm oil, palm kernel oil and coconut oil, contain saturated fat that can increase bad cholesterol. These oils are often found in baked goods and packaged foods.

Small changes can help support healthier cholesterol levels. Enjoy vegetables, fruits, whole grains, beans, nuts, seeds, unsaturated fats and lean proteins as part of an overall healthy eating pattern. Limit ultra-processed foods that are high in saturated fats, added sugars and sodium.

Your cholesterol levels show how much cholesterol is circulating in your blood. Your HDL (“good” cholesterol) is the one number you want to be high (ideally 60 to 80). Your LDL (“bad” cholesterol) should be below 100. Your total should be below 200. Talk with your provider about what your results mean for you and how to manage your cholesterol.

Why are my cholesterol numbers important?
Your cholesterol levels are important because they help you know your risk for heart disease. Cholesterol is a type of lipid (fat) that helps your body perform many important functions. But too much cholesterol in your blood is harmful. It can enter your artery wall, weaken it and lead to atherosclerotic plaque (hardened deposits) forming.

This process of plaque buildup is called atherosclerosis. It can lead to serious problems like:

Coronary artery disease: Blocked blood flow to your heart
Peripheral artery disease: Blocked blood flow to your legs and arms
Carotid artery disease: Blocked blood flow to your brain
You can live for many years with high cholesterol and not even know it. That’s why it’s essential to get your cholesterol numbers checked on a regular basis. If your cholesterol numbers are too high (hyperlipidemia), that’s a red flag for you and your healthcare provider, and it may place you at risk of a heart attack or stroke.

Many people have high cholesterol, which is a major risk factor for heart disease. But you’re not stuck with the cholesterol numbers you have. It’s possible to change them by tweaking some habits and maybe taking some medicines. The first step is learning what your numbers are. Then, you can work with your healthcare provider to reach healthier numbers if needed.

What cholesterol levels are tested?
The main levels your healthcare provider checks are:

Total cholesterol: This is the total amount of cholesterol that’s hanging out in your blood.
LDL (low-density lipoprotein): This is the “bad” cholesterol that, in excess, contributes to plaque buildup in your arteries.
VLDL (very-low density lipoprotein): This is another type of cholesterol that’s “bad” when you have too much of it.
HDL (high-density lipoprotein): This is the “good” cholesterol that helps clear out the bad stuff your body doesn’t need.
Your provider checks your cholesterol levels with a blood test they call a lipid panel or profile. They also measure your triglycerides (another type of fat) at the same time. A provider will draw blood from a vein in your arm and send it to a lab for analysis.

Be sure to follow your provider’s instructions on how to prepare for the test. You’ll likely need to fast for 12 hours beforehand. This means avoiding all foods and drinks except water.

When your results come in, your provider will let you know. You may also be able to access your results through your electronic medical record. The results will show your cholesterol levels as milligrams of cholesterol per deciliter of blood. This is abbreviated as mg/dL.

What are normal cholesterol levels?
Normal cholesterol levels vary based on your age, ethnicity and sex. Here are numbers that healthcare providers consider normal for most adults. Generally speaking, though, low levels of total cholesterol and LDL cholesterol are considered better:

Total cholesterol: Below 200
LDL cholesterol: Below 100
VLDL cholesterol: Below 30
HDL cholesterol: 40-80 (males), 50-80 (females)
Here are a few things to know about these levels:

If you have heart disease or many risk factors, your LDL target may be different. Your healthcare provider may want it to be below 70.
Your HDL is the one number providers like to see higher, not lower. Ideally, your HDL should be between 60 and 80 to protect you against heart disease. An HDL over 80 is too high and may not be healthy for you.
Your HDL is also the only number that has sex-based differences. Females need a higher HDL level than males.
What’s considered high cholesterol?
High cholesterol generally means your total cholesterol is 200 mg/dL or higher, or higher than normal. But providers also use terms like “borderline high” to break down your results. If your numbers are close to normal, they may be easier to manage.

Here are the high cholesterol numbers to know:

Total cholesterol:

Borderline high: 200-239
High: 240 or higher
LDL cholesterol:

Elevated: 100-129
Borderline high: 130-159
High: 160-189
Very high: 190 or higher
VLDL cholesterol:

30 or higher
Can cholesterol levels be too low?
For LDL, VLDL and total cholesterol, lower is better — typically as low as you can go. Researchers haven’t set a lower limit for these. But your HDL is unique. It needs to be higher, rather than lower. It shouldn’t fall below 40 (in males) or 50 (in females).

